[Review only] Comments spatial (#560)
mlr-org/mlr3book: book/special.qmd

% The example highlights how "NSpCV" makes it appear as if the decision tree is performing better than it is with significantly higher estimated performance, however this is an overconfident prediction due to the autocorrelation in the data.
%
% ```{r special-046, warning=FALSE,message=FALSE}
% learner = lrn("classif.rpart", predict_type = "prob")
% rsmp_nsp = rsmp("repeated_cv", folds = 3, repeats = 2, id = "NSpCV")
% rsmp_sp = rsmp("repeated_spcv_coords", folds = 3, repeats = 2, id = "SpCV")
%
% design = benchmark_grid(task, learner, c(rsmp_nsp, rsmp_sp))
% bmr = benchmark(design)
% bmr$aggregate(msr("classif.acc"))[, c(5, 7)]
% ```
%
% In the above example, the non-spatial resampling method means that the train and test data are very similar due to spatial autocorrelation, and so this is almost as bad as evaluating a model on the training data (see @sec-basics).
% In contrast, the spatial method has accommodated for autocorrelation and the test data is therefore less correlated (though still some association will remain) with the training data.

> % Visually this can be seen using built-in `r ref("autoplot")` methods.

Author: ```suggestion
% This can be seen visually by using the built-in `r ref("autoplot")` methods of `r mlr3spatiotempcv`.
```

% In @fig-sprsmp we visualize how the task is partitioned according to the spatial resampling method (@fig-sprsmp top) and non-spatial resampling method (@fig-sprsmp bottom).

> % There is a clear separation between coordinates using the 'correct' spatial resampling method whereas the train and test splits overlap significantly (and are therefore highly correlated) using the non-spatial method.

Author: ```suggestion
% There is a clear separation in space for the respective partitions when using the spatial resampling whereas the train and test splits overlap a lot (and are therefore more correlated) using the non-spatial method.
```

Given that "significantly" is often associated with a statical meaning I'd suggest to avoid the term in such contexts.

The degree of correlation depends and is not always "high".

"seperation between coordinates" is uncommon wording here. One would rather say "Separation in space for the respective partitions".

%
% ```{r special-047}
% #| fig-cap: Scatterplots show separation of train (blue) and test (orange) data for the first three (left to right) folds of the first repetition of the cross-validation. The top row is spatial resampling where train and test data are clearly separated. The bottom row is non-spatial resampling where there is overlap in train and test data.
% #| fig-alt: Six scatter plots are shown with y-axes from 4 degrees South to 3.97 degrees South and x-axes from 79.08 degrees West to 79.06 degrees West. The top row of plots show a very clear separation with no overlap between blue and orange datapoints, whereas the bottom low shows significant overlap.
% #| label: fig-sprsmp
%
% library(patchwork)
% autoplot(rsmp_sp, task, fold_id = c(1:3), size = 0.7) /
%   autoplot(rsmp_nsp, task, fold_id = c(1:3), size = 0.7) &
%   scale_y_continuous(breaks = seq(-3.97, -4, -0.01)) &
%   scale_x_continuous(breaks = seq(-79.06, -79.08, -0.02))
% ```
%

> % Now we have seen why spatial resampling methods matter we can take a look at what is implemented in `r mlr3spatiotempcv`.

Author: ```suggestion
% After we have seen why spatial resampling matters, we can take a look at what is implemented in `r mlr3spatiotempcv`.
```

> % At the time of writing we have implemented 19 different resampling methods for spatial and spatiotemporal analysis.

Author: I'd rather list the unique ones and not count Repeated/non-repeated as a unique method.

Also I'd like to point out that "we" didn't implement/invent them but rather collected them from various packages/implementations out there. Big difference :)

% These are categorized into:
%

> % * Blocking -- Create rectangular blocks in 2D/3D space (as opposed to partitioning in 1D space used in non-spatial methods)

Author: All spatial methods operate at least in 2D space. This sounds like as if only "blocking" would do.

% * Buffering -- Create buffering zones to remove observations between train and test sets
% * Spatiotemporal clustering -- Clusters based on coordinates (and/or time-points)
% * Feature space clustering -- Clusters based on feature space and not necessarily spatiotemporal

> % * Partitioning -- Grouped by factor variables

Author: This description would optimally align with the categorization we did in https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.12674 where we used "Custom (partitioning)" for the factor var grouping and also added more information about each category.

Also partly available at https://mlr3spatiotempcv.mlr-org.com/articles/mlr3spatiotempcv.html#upstream-packages-and-scientific-references.

%
% The choice of method may depend on specific characteristics of the dataset and there is no easy rule to pick one method over another, full details of different methods can be found in @Schratz2021 -- the paper deliberately avoids recommending one method over another as the 'optimal' choice is highly dependent on the predictive task, autocorrelation in the data, and the spatial structure of the sampling design.
% The documentation for each of the implemented methods includes details of each method as well as references to original publications.
%
% :::{.callout-tip}
% ## Spatio*temporal* resampling
%
% We have focused on spatial analysis but referred to "spatiotemporal" and "spatiotemp".

> % The resampling methods discussed in this section extend trivially to temporal analysis (or spatial and temporal analysis combined) by setting the `"time"` `col_role` in the task (@sec-performance).

Author: ```suggestion
% The spatial-only resampling methods discussed in this section extend trivially to temporal analysis (or spatial and temporal analysis combined) by setting the `"time"` `col_role` in the task (@sec-performance).
```

Author: Reading this as a user, I would be a bit confused:

- What does it mean here "extend trivially"? What would I need to do exactly? (Disclaimer: I don't think it's "that easy")
- Defining `time` as a col_role is only helpful (and needed) when aiming for a spatiotemporal partitioning, which is quite advanced as the partitioning gets a lot more complex.

I'd suggest to reword and take out "trivally" and mention that so far everything shown has focused on spatial-only partitioning and extending it to spatiotemporal is possible but advanced.

% See the `r mlr3spatiotempcv` visualization `r link("https://mlr3spatiotempcv.mlr-org.com/articles/spatiotemp-viz.html", "vignette")` for specific details about 3D spatiotemporal visualization.
% :::
%
% ### Spatial Prediction {#sec-spatial-prediction}
%
% Until now we have looked at resampling to accommodate spatiotemporal *features*, but what if you want to make spatiotemporal *predictions*?

> % In this case the goal is to make classification or regression predictions for spatial coordinates at a pixel level, usually by creating and labelling raster images.

Author: ```suggestion
% In this case the goal is to make classification or regression predictions at the pixel level, i.e. for an area, defined by the geometric resolution, of a raster image.
```

"Spatial coordinates at pixel level" doesn't go together in this context as a pixel is composed out of multiple coordinates (4) and you would not predict just these and then interpolate. I.e. you don't do "point predictions" but "area predictions" here and one pixel = 1 prediction, 1 coordinate != 1 prediction.

% Both files are shipped with, and can be downloaded from, `r mlr3spatial`.
%
% ```{r special-048, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
% library(sf)
%
% # load sample points
% leipzig_vector = sf::read_sf(system.file("extdata",
%   "leipzig_points.gpkg", package = "mlr3spatial"),
%   stringsAsFactors = TRUE)
% # create training data
% tsk_leipzig = as_task_classif_st(leipzig_vector, target = "land_cover")
%
% # load raster image
% leipzig_raster = terra::rast(system.file("extdata", "leipzig_raster.tif",
%   package = "mlr3spatial"))
% # create testing data
% tsk_predict = as_task_unsupervised(leipzig_raster)
% ```
%
% Now we can continue as normal to train and predict with a classification learner, in this case a random forest.
%
% ```{r special-049}
% lrn = lrn("classif.ranger")$train(tsk_leipzig)
% pred = predict_spatial(tsk_predict, lrn, format = "terra")
% pred
% ```
%
% In this example we specified creation of a `terra` object, which can be visualized with in-built plotting methods.
%
% ```{r special-050, message = FALSE, cache.lazy=FALSE, cache=FALSE}
% library(terra, exclude = "resample")

> % plot(pred, col = c("#440154FF", "#443A83FF", "#31688EFF",

Author: ```suggestion
% autoplot(pred, col = c("#440154FF", "#443A83FF", "#31688EFF",
```
